our next speaker is Morin alari and she
is a New York and Bay Area based Iranian
Kurdish artist using 3D simulation video
sculpture and digital fabrication as
tools to refigure myth and history
through archival practices and
storytelling her work weaves together
complex counternarratives in opposition
to the lasting influence of Western
technological colonialism in the context
of the Middle East and North Africa
Morin has been part of numerous
exhibitions festivals and workshops
around the world including uh the Venice
banali uh the new Museum the Whitney
Museum of American art the pompo center
Moma and many other
institutions this uh year uh Morin is
the recipient of the UC Berkeley
Chancellor's post-doctoral Fellowship
award and she is currently an assistant
professor of digital media art at
Stanford University please welcome to
the stage Morin
alari hi everyone um thanks so much for
being here it's so nice to see so many
familiar faces um and thanks to gray
area for um always being such a generous
supportive space for critical thinking
of technology for my work for many many
years um so for the last decade I would
say my work has been about building
building worlds between art technology
activism and history through a research
based framework one way to frame my
practice which is what I'm going to try
to do today is through questions of
closure and opening questions of access
open source ownership copyright humans
and machines and the reframing and
refiguring of these topics in the global
North versus the global
South in this talk I'll be asking
questions that I might not have the
answers for but that I am showing up for
every day that is the core of my work as
a maker thinker and organizer I believe
in the equal value of process to the
artwork of the aftermath of the process
and what then Echoes towards and
backwards literally into the universe as
we Mark something in
it I have seen and known that this
practice of art making for me is not
just about objects spaces or tangible
things but much more about what we make
of it all into a last ing openness that
others can build on so I will start with
this question does power lie in the
openings or inclosures or is it in the
attempt one might make to decide how is
it possible that a word can carry such
Contracting feelings to be good and evil
at once extremely greedy and utterly
generous side by side closure as of the
end to something termination as of
shutting down closing off as of the
condition I of being closed yet closure
also as of something settled or resolved
something we have grieved have come to
peace with an often comforting or
satisfying sense of
finality did you know sometimes closure
can look like an opening that sometimes
an opening is in fact a closure did you
notice who walked in when you open that
door whose air you abandoned when you
close the windows do you remember who
was it who got to breathe out that s
satisfying sight of relief declaring all
is good do you remember who smiled
back I want to start with this new
project which is called speculations on
capture it's a 40-minute film and
installation that I just finished and
that is currently on view as a solo
exhibition in London at the Victorian
Albert
Museum um some of you might know
Victorian arbert museum has one of the
largest Islamic object Collections and
so this project considers the colonial
history of BNA Islamic collection as it
relates to physical objects and their
Destiny in the past and the Future IT
explores the stories of astronomical
instruments made in Iran and Pakistan
and now held at the VNA dating from the
1200s to the
1700s um we 3D scan and also 3D modeled
each astronomical object specifically
for this project for the first time that
are featured in the film alongside
archiva documents and related
photographs um so the Museum's archive
captured only fragments of these objects
histories documents record their arrival
between about 1865 to 1930 but there is
little sense of how their displacement
impacted their places of origin and the
people living there how did this object
end up at the Museum during this time so
um I'm using the framework of capture as
a way to connect multiple points here so
I'm thinking about capture as an act of
taking capture as taking into one's
position or control capture as to catch
grab trap and trap of an object a
Heritage a people's
history capture um as to capture an
object and relocate its existence its
purpose its function to take away its
power its Wonder its magic from the
people it belonged to into the hands of
the colonizers to capture an object that
the use of it was to capture data that
data of the cosmos is to take away that
data to bring an object of the past into
a context is that it does not belong to
is to take away the future of its people
the reason I'm interested in
specifically astronomic astronomical
objects here is because of the history
and the role they they played in this
case within you know the history of Arab
and Persian um Islamic cultures in being
used both as devices of knowing and
understanding the cosmos and the planets
and scientific research but also in
their um you know the whole like field
of astrology that got developed and
became a very important um way of
connecting and understanding the world
around us you know beginning um from the
Islamic Golden Era
basically and then capture also as it
relates to a tool a photograph a 3D scan
to record data using a device like a
camera as of a tool or a machine saving
data as of capturing holding a trace off
Capt as an object in position of a
process or a pro or a person in position
of a gaze um I don't have as many good
images yet from my show just opened uh
last week at VNA but um alongside the
film that I'm showing there's a
Observatory designed um kind of like
sitting architecture space where you sit
on to watch to view the film and then
there are some of the objects that are
spoken about in the film inside these
displays but but they are kind of hidden
and visible so from certain positions
you can see them some certain positions
you can see them kind of like working
through these ideas of UNG gazing um and
I'm going to play five minutes of this
film it's again 40 minutes I'm only
focusing on the part that uh is on the
third part of the capture capture of uh
you know tools cameras and Technologies
um and yeah I'm going to if you can
please play that the colonial practice
ice of image making has deep Footprints
in photography which lends its Legacy to
videography to 3D scanning and
Beyond carrying this upset past the
present too holds its own version of the
colonial
gaze here another tool of image making
is bent into yet another tool of the
master
[Music]
eing through a
void a rhythm an accidental
dance a touch a
turn Another Touch another
turn a traceable muscle memory a pattern
I must
[Music]
investigate starting in the 19th century
photography was often used as a tool of
the colonial
gaze the colonial gaze reflects the ways
Colonial Powers use visual technology to
observe document and control subject
populations and their cultures European
photographers often use photog phography
to document the people landscapes and
culture of regions they considered
exotic mysterious beguiling
elusive the history of camera technology
in Iran once again gives us the chance
to cross path with nasin
Shahar it is 1842 and Narin sha is
believed to have acquired his first
camera this acquisition marks the
beginning of his deep interest in
photography making him one of the early
adopters of this technology in
Iran his passion for photography grows
from this initial encounter and leads to
some of the most iconic photographic
documentation of his
Reign at the time of reard Smiths and
Marlins while Iran is not formally
colonized by the Western world it is
heavily influenced by European powers so
image making in Iran of the 19th and
20th century is both an artistic
expression and a pleasing of European
audiences which means the majority of
photographs coming out of this era
inadvertently contribute to the Colonial
gaze a gaze on people a gaze on objects
a gaze that indicates on
[Music]
ownership for
B
[Music]
for okay well if you're in London I hope
we can see the rest 35 minutes minutes
of
it um okay kind of um I'm like now
moving to another project which actually
connects to this era um the same era in
Iran 19th and 20th Century but with
focus on AI um how about closures when
it comes to AI I know yesterday there
were a lot of talks and conversations
about AI maybe I'll keep mine short
today um but I'll start with this
question of can a virtual body sense
itself into being can it embody
ey in 2022 I created a project called
moonface specifically for an exhibition
actually on ferof file um and in this
work I use AI more specifically VQ plus
clip libraries to create paintings that
are gender fluid using an archives of
paintings from um this this same era
1781 to 1921 in Iran during this time uh
gender is is you know very fluid there
are a lot of paintings photography
coming out of this era where women have
mustaches or if they didn't they would
draw some they have unibrows men are
much more like feminine and that's
considered um you know what's what's
what's beautiful um so the early
paintings of this era when you look at
an early 19th
century um it's always portraited as
again like these these kind of like
couples that you can't know if they're
two women or two men um and also uh you
know kind of like one thing that happens
through this time is that by the by we
by the time we arrive to the end of the
um 19th century early 20th century these
kind of presentations of gender starts
to change in the visual culture of Iran
and kind of like ends into a much more
gendered presentation of men and women
um and the reasons behind this is one
the interest of camera technology is
also Iran is going to reduce
westernization and modernization and is
getting influenced by European painters
of the time where they're like painting
women in a very specific way and men in
a very specific way and so this kind of
modernization of Iran at a time changes
these queer visual culture and kind of
like ends these visual cultures of
painting So with this project I create
um I work with this like AI libraries
and recreate um kind of these like
paintings that reimagines these like
queer portraits again um work working um
with with these libraries and obviously
also have to like tricking them a lot
because there were a lot of archives
that I had to find and give into the
system to understand what I actually
want to um you know make happen um just
like wait a little bit and this work is
presented also as an installation in a
dome like mirror of kind of shape of
video installation as well as these
frame frames that you know kind of like
very common a way that paintings were
shown um that are like velvet
frames um and now kind of closure and
openings as how can we invest in lasting
ways that guide us to see technology
through a de Colonial feminist queer
non-western lenss how do we continue to
attend to the work of reframing and
challenging geocentric forms of
knowledge accumulation and Aesthetics um
this is a project I think some some of
you know about she who sees the unknown
which was a 5year research based project
I worked on um which uh I am using 3D
scanning 3D modeling 3D printing um and
also storytelling to recreate these like
monstrous female queer figures of milis
origin using the traditions and myth
associated with them to explore
different topics uh from patriarch ISM
to environmental duration in
relationship to the Middle East um there
are five figures that each have their
own installation and sculptures I'm not
going to talk about any of that today
but what I want to talk about is the
archive that I developed as part of this
project as I said this was a super
long-term project there was a lot of
research and Gathering material of these
like basically forgotten or like um
under represented ma manuscripts and
illustrations that I was very interested
in um but then that process of gathering
this archive uh was very challenging
because a lot of these manuscripts are
actually in different countries outside
of Iran so to have access through
museums and digital libraries to a lot
of these manuscript was a pain um a lot
of time they wouldn't give me full
access they would only give me black and
white access of some of this stuff um so
thinking about everything I've talked
about so far with the focus of of
digital
colonialism I wanted to kind of ask this
question of how might we offer knowledge
while also protecting knowledge what
remains unknowable within and outside of
archives who should have access to a
particular story digital data set or
technological Legacy when are exclusions
and inclusions form of protection when
are they in actions of violence right um
which again goes back to ideas of
closure and opening can we create
closures that are in fact openings for
some so with this archive there are
multiple layers to it um and there are
around 60 you know PDFs that I have
scanned or like found these are again
like manuscripts from different
resources if you know far or Arabic um
you can have access to all the layers of
the archive if you know English you can
have access to the first layer of the
archive meaning that um you know if you
know English you can download some stuff
look through a lot of listings of stuff
and have access to things but then to
get to the second third and fourth layer
of the archive you're asked to put in
these what I call cultural codes of a
mix of alphabets and and and numbers um
to be able to have access to further and
further material I was interested in
this project kind of like as an
experimentation of again how can we
think about in in in in the time that we
live under this like Imperial Colonial
still like Legacy of um you know our our
like worlds and systems how can we
challenge the way that we receive
information how can we challenge the way
we um have access to knowledge but how
do we also again protect um some some
aspects of these like knowledge building
and knowledge
sharing um I'm again not going to be
able to get into this really but this is
a project that I'm working on right now
I've been working on this project for
the last four years which is an
installation and a film Project called
the remaining signs of future centuries
um which is a speculative documentary um
and an installation series that traced
the neglected History of islamicate
Science and Technology as an anchor
point of seeing oursel as a people
people of Middle East into our own
imagination of the project um so in this
project I'm investigating Innovations
and ideas of um ideas that you know were
created during Islamic Golden Era I
think the famous one is for example math
you know everyone like knows how how
much influential you know this era was
to mathematics but this expands to
Optics again astronomy astrology to
Alchemy um all many many fields of
Sciences um that without this this time
would not kind of like be able to get
developed in in the Western World um
and I'm you know this is kind of like in
in process I will talk a little bit
about it maybe during Q&A but because my
time's over I just want to end it with
um this kind of reframing and kind of
like bringing together a lot of things I
talked about which is that for me in my
work whether it's digital colonialism as
a methodology additivism as a movie
movement building refiguring as a
framework whether it's radical pedagogy
as a collaboration critical thinking of
Technology as a care practice or
transnational queer and feminist
movement building and event organizing
as teaching resisting and healing work
I'm interested in art and Technology as
a practice that is about the lessons we
must learn from the universe and the
past before before the machines a
practice of technology that is about
thinking with and through openings and
closures and most importantly
importantly a practice with technology
to build a case for advocating that
technology needs magic inspired by the
scientists and inventors of the Islamic
world who were interested in
understanding and building connections
to the mysteries of the universe
mathematicians who were magicians and
astronomers who were astrologers and
Beyond I like to believe learning and
building on this past is possible and
our way for moving forward thanks for
listening
[Applause]
thank
you hi Marin thank you so much for
sharing your work with us uh today um I
I'm yeah always Blown Away by your work
uh I was curious if you could tell us
more about what your research proc
process was like for speculations uh on
capture were you working
um with other archives and resources
outside of the the
VNA thanks for that question it was a
very intense research process because I
was looking through hundreds and
hundreds of letters of you know again
how these objects got into the museum
and um I was working with the curators
at the Museum who gave me access to
files that like public won't have access
to um and then there's always again
there's like in this gesture of
obviously transparency there is a lot of
information that is that is missing I
don't know if anyone here might know for
example the work of Mimi onua who talks
a lot about what does missing
information archives that are not there
what does absent of knowledge tell us
right so with this it was like very much
of that that I could only go back to
certain amount of history and time into
how these things got there it's that's
why it's got speculations because in the
film I'm I'm speculating the stories of
these objects right um and kind of like
thinking who who were the people at a
time who were in Iran who was like
Robert murer Smith who was like this
person who was the director of the
telegraph line but he was also a
self-claimed archaeologist who brought
thousands of objects from Iran made a
deal with the the prime minister at a
time and they were like bringing all
these objects without opening the boxes
in in the custom house so so much stuff
got out of the country for example
during this like very specific era and
um kind of yeah so like getting into all
these details and like really trying to
understand what was the storyline and
that imagining and filling in the gaps
as a speculative work um was my favorite
part but also was very
challenging thank you um I'm also
curious about your new work that you
mentioned uh at the end the remaining
signs of future centuries um where are
you at in your research process uh with
that and do you have an idea of what the
kind of form of the work will take in
the
end yeah I mean this is a this is a
project I've been filming producing for
uh yeah almost like three and a half
years now um because I'm shooting some
stuff in Iraq I'm shooting some stuff in
Egypt I'm shooting some stuff in Iran um
and I can't go back to Iran so I I had a
whole team shooting things while I was
on FaceTime it was it was a crazy
process but um that's kind of how I'm
trying to like bring a lot of these
histories together that happen at a time
in in different um countries so if you
have money give me money because I need
it to finish this film but um it is kind
of like scientific and both like about
science and technology and actual
scientific facts where I'm interviewing
people that are historians or scientists
but also
um written poetic monologues that are
completely like imagined as a way to
reimagine the Future in which um we have
other ways of being with these
Technologies thank you so much Marin
thank you